# Cat-Dog-Image-Recognition-using-CNN

Dataset used: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/chetankv/dogs-cats-images

Aim: The project aimed to build a model that recognizes the images of dogs and cats using a Convolutional Neural Network.

Steps:

Part 1: Importing Libraries and Data Preprocessing:     
1. ImageDataGenerator: It allows your model to receive new variations of the images at each epoch. For example, if you have 1000 images in your dataset and the batch size is 10. Then the "ImageDataGenerator" will produce 10 images in each training iteration.  
2. The data is already split into test and training datasets and given in folders respectively. Thus, we will load the data using ImageDataGenerator into train_set and training_set.  
3. The training_set has 4001 images of cats and 4001 images of dogs. Whereas, the test_set has 1001 images of cats and 1001 images of dogs.  
4. There is another dataset given as 'single_prediction', which consists of random images of cats and dogs that will be used to check the model's accuracy.  

Part 2: Building the Convolutional Neural Network
1. Building a Convolutional Neural Network.
2. Adding a Pooling layer. Pooling Layer summarises the features present in a region of the feature map generated by a convolutional layer.
3. Adding a second Convolutional Neural Network and Pooling Layer.
4. Using Flattening to convert all the resultant 2-dimensional arrays from pooled feature maps into a single long continuous linear vector.
5. The output of the Flatten layer is fed into a fully connected layer to get the features we need.
6. Adding the output layer.

Part 3: Training the Convolutional Neural Network  
1. Compiling the CNN. Training the CNN on the training_set and Evaluating it on the test_set.
2. We are training the model for 25 epochs. During the training, we can see that after the 24th epoch, the loss starts to increase and the accuracy starts to decrease which indicates that the model is Overfitting.
3. To solve overfitting we can use steps like early stopping and Regularization.
4. We are getting a loss of 0.3122 and an accuracy of 0.8610, which is pretty good.

Part 4: Making a Single Prediction:
  We will make use of a single_predicition dataset and test if our CNN model is predicting the image correctly or not.
  

Conclusion:
The model could recognize with an accuracy of 0.8610 and a loss of 0.3122.
